---
title: "How does a rails implementing ransack search - routing configuration work?"
date: "2024-12-14"
id: "how-does-a-rails-implementing-ransack-search---routing-configuration-work"
---

alright, let's talk about how rails handles search routing when you're using ransack. i've spent a good chunk of time with this particular combo, and it can get a little hairy if you’re not careful. it's one of those things that seems simple on the surface but has some nuances you need to grok.

i remember back in my early days, working on a project for a small online library, we used ransack to let users sift through the catalog. we started with a very basic setup, and everything was fine until the library started adding more categories and the filters were increasing in complexity. the routes got messy real quick. i started seeing patterns where i had to change the routes every time a search attribute was added. that's when i realised i needed to understand how this stuff actually works.

so, at the core, the way rails, along with ransack, handle search routing comes down to leveraging the inherent mechanisms of http requests, primarily using get requests and query parameters. ransack, which operates on top of active record, takes these parameters and translates them into database queries. when we talk about routing in rails, what we're really talking about is how a particular url request gets mapped to a controller action. with ransack involved, we need to make sure our routes are set up to accept the parameters it sends and that we handle these parameters within our controller.

let's think of an example, imagine we have a `books` resource, and we want to be able to search by title and author.

here's a simplified version of what our `routes.rb` might look like:

```ruby
# config/routes.rb
resources :books, only: [:index]
```

this sets up a basic route for our `index` action in the `books` controller. by default this would translate to a url of ` /books `. but we don't have search yet, ransack will send parameters in the url like `/books?q[title_cont]=some_title&q[author_cont]=some_author`, the key here is the `q` parameter. rails will parse that into a hash. the `_cont` is ransack's way of doing "contains" filtering.

now, in our `books_controller.rb`, we need to handle these parameters:

```ruby
# app/controllers/books_controller.rb
class BooksController < ApplicationController
  def index
    @q = Book.ransack(params[:q])
    @books = @q.result
  end
end
```

here, `Book.ransack(params[:q])` initiates the ransack search using the parameters we extracted from the url with `params[:q]`. and `@q.result` executes the database query.

a basic `index.html.erb` view could have something like this, remember this is just a very simple example:

```erb
# app/views/books/index.html.erb
<%= search_form_for @q do |f| %>
  <%= f.label :title_cont, "Title contains" %>
  <%= f.search_field :title_cont %>
  <%= f.label :author_cont, "Author contains" %>
  <%= f.search_field :author_cont %>
  <%= f.submit "search" %>
<% end %>
<ul>
  <% @books.each do |book| %>
    <li><%= book.title %> by <%= book.author %></li>
  <% end %>
</ul>
```

we're using the `search_form_for` helper, which is a ransack helper that generates the html form using a ransack builder (`f`). when you submit this form, it will automatically send the ransack specific search params to our `index` action.

the magic happens in this `search_form_for` helper. if you want more complex forms or even use ajax for the forms, it's really important to understand how this helper works to generate the `q` query parameters.

now, let's say we wanted to allow search based on publication year, it's useful to have both a range search and an exact year search, here is the modified form:

```erb
# app/views/books/index.html.erb

<%= search_form_for @q do |f| %>
  <%= f.label :title_cont, "Title contains" %>
  <%= f.search_field :title_cont %>
  <%= f.label :author_cont, "Author contains" %>
  <%= f.search_field :author_cont %>

  <%= f.label :publication_year_eq, "Publication year is" %>
    <%= f.search_field :publication_year_eq %>

    <%= f.label :publication_year_gteq, "Publication year from" %>
    <%= f.search_field :publication_year_gteq %>

    <%= f.label :publication_year_lteq, "Publication year until" %>
    <%= f.search_field :publication_year_lteq %>

  <%= f.submit "search" %>
<% end %>

<ul>
  <% @books.each do |book| %>
    <li><%= book.title %> by <%= book.author %> (published <%= book.publication_year%>)</li>
  <% end %>
</ul>

```

and our controller action would remain the same.

i've found that one of the biggest issues people run into when using ransack involves the routes. you see, rails routing is all about conventions. it expects certain things, and if you try to deviate too much, things get confusing really fast, if the query parameters generated by ransack are not valid (meaning they are not what you defined on the search form), rails will ignore them, this also is a common problem, i spent two days debugging a javascript form issue, it ended up being a `name` parameter that was missing in my form, that was a pretty funny error.

one important point is that if you want your search to be usable by humans or robots you need to use get requests for searches. if you start using post requests for complex search queries that is where things might get problematic in the long run. get requests allow browsers to store search queries in their history and also allow indexing by search engines. you want your search results to be accessible through direct urls.

when building more complex applications you might want to consider using query objects for your searches, it will help keep your controller cleaner, here is a possible implementation:

```ruby
# app/queries/book_search_query.rb
class BookSearchQuery
  attr_reader :params

  def initialize(params)
    @params = params
  end

  def call
    @q = Book.ransack(params[:q])
    @q.result
  end
end
```

and our controller would look like:

```ruby
# app/controllers/books_controller.rb
class BooksController < ApplicationController
  def index
    @books = BookSearchQuery.new(params).call
    @q = Book.ransack(params[:q])
  end
end
```

this approach abstracts away the ransack call from the controller and it's also testable, this will improve your application as your queries get more complex.

another area where things could get a little complex is when you have nested attributes, say you had tags associated with a book, and you wanted to filter using the tag name. ransack is very good at that as long as you set up your models correctly, with associated relations.

for deep understanding the concepts behind http requests, i'd recommend taking a look at "http: the definitive guide" by david gourley and brian totty. it's a deep dive into all the details that happen when your browser talks to the server. for a solid foundation on active record, and rails in general, the "agile web development with rails 7" book will give you insights on the inner workings of the framework. and for ransack itself the gem documentation is always the best choice to see the details and how to configure your searches. the official github repository of ransack is also a great place to go when you have questions about particular implementations.

in short, rails and ransack work well together when you understand how http requests, query parameters and model search work. keep your routes clean, understand how ransack processes parameters and don’t be afraid to extract complex search logic into separate classes. hopefully, my experience can save you a little of the headache i had to go through.
