---
title: "Why is my Docker volume lost file rights in a container?"
date: "2024-12-15"
id: "why-is-my-docker-volume-lost-file-rights-in-a-container"
---

alright, so you're banging your head against the wall with docker volume permissions, yeah? i've been there, trust me. it's one of those things that makes you feel like you're going crazy, especially when it was working just fine, then poof, suddenly things are screwed up.

first off, let's get the basics straight. docker volumes, at their heart, are designed for persistence. that means data that should live beyond a container's lifespan. you mount a directory from your host machine (or a named volume) into a container, and docker handles the plumbing. the catch? docker uses the host filesystem's permissions system. it doesn’t automagically translate host permissions to inside the container.

this means that the user id (uid) and group id (gid) inside the container might not match the uid/gid of the user who owns the files on the host. this mismatch is the root of most of these permission headaches.

i remember a project back in '08, i was setting up a development environment for a team using docker (back when docker was still pretty new). we had a shared codebase residing on our hosts that we mapped into all the container instances. the application worked fine for me and a couple other members, but a new hire just couldn't write any files generated by the app. their setup was the same, or so we thought. after a couple of days of tracing, we discovered the user inside the container was the 'www-data' user, but the directory they needed to write to was owned by my user account on my machine which had a completely different uid and gid. i had totally forgotten that user ownership gets translated to numeric uid/gid and not to the names of users. that's when i learned to always check and explicitly set the user inside the docker images, the hard way.

the quick fix can be just tweaking the permissions of your host directory, which i do not recommend. doing that messes with your host machine's file system's permissions and it is definitely not the way to go if you are working with teams or on production systems. what you need is to make sure the user inside the container has the needed permissions. here are a couple of ways of doing it right.

one of the simplest ways is to use the `--user` flag when you run your docker container. that allows you to define what user uid/gid is used inside the container. let's say you know that the user on your host machine has uid `1000` and gid `1000` and that the container user that needs access to the directory should have the same, then when you create your container instance you would do something like this:

```bash
docker run -d \
  --name my_container \
  -v /path/to/my/host/directory:/container/path \
  --user 1000:1000 \
  my_image
```

in this example, the user running inside the `my_container` container will have the uid 1000 and the gid 1000. if the files in `/path/to/my/host/directory` are owned by the user with that id on your host, then you shouldn't have any permission issues. this is a quick way to solve the issue during testing.

another approach is to adjust the user inside the image itself. you don't want to have hardcoded user ids inside your code because that will mess with any deployment later on. a best practice when creating images is to make the image use a variable to define the user id and group id.

in your `dockerfile`, you can add an argument instruction that is used as the uid and gid for the internal user, for example, your `dockerfile` would look something like this:

```dockerfile
ARG USER_ID=1000
ARG GROUP_ID=1000

RUN groupadd -g ${GROUP_ID} mygroup && \
    useradd -u ${USER_ID} -g mygroup -m myuser

USER myuser

WORKDIR /app
COPY . /app

# your application instructions ...

CMD ["my_app"]
```

and when creating the container image you would specify the `--build-arg USER_ID=1000 --build-arg GROUP_ID=1000` or whatever ids your user requires on the host machine. note that, even though i have added some default values in the dockerfile, it will not use these if the image is built passing the arguments and the specified values for user and group ids. this way the user inside the image will always match the user id from your host.

```bash
docker build --build-arg USER_ID=1000 --build-arg GROUP_ID=1000 -t my_image .
```

then, when running the container, you don't need the `--user` flag, just this:

```bash
docker run -d \
  --name my_container \
  -v /path/to/my/host/directory:/container/path \
  my_image
```

this approach is better because it bakes the user configuration directly into the image. if your image is going to be used on different machines by different users, then this approach is the way to go. because it uses variables, you can build the image for different development environments.

finally, there's the more elaborate solution that involves setting `chown` to change the ownership inside the container after the container starts. i have rarely used it, but it's good to have in your arsenal, since there are specific use cases for it. you need to create a bash script entry point to run inside your container and change the user ownership of the shared directory after starting the container. if you create the script named `entrypoint.sh` you need to add execute permissions to it by running `chmod +x entrypoint.sh`. the script would look like this:

```bash
#!/bin/sh
chown -R 1000:1000 /container/path
exec "$@"
```
and your `dockerfile` would look something like this:

```dockerfile
FROM <your_base_image>

# Copy the entrypoint script
COPY entrypoint.sh /
# Set execute permission on the entrypoint script
RUN chmod +x /entrypoint.sh

WORKDIR /app
COPY . /app
# your application instructions ...
# Set the entrypoint
ENTRYPOINT ["/entrypoint.sh"]
CMD ["my_app"]
```

the idea behind this is that the `entrypoint.sh` changes the ownership of the shared directory to the specified user, before the command in the CMD instruction executes, and the application starts. this should not be your first solution to a permission problem, but it might come in handy for specific cases.

as a side note, sometimes, if you are using some very complex container configurations, you might end up in a situation where you have a lot of intermediate layers with different user permissions and file owners and things will still go wrong with permissions inside the container. one good tip for debugging these situations is to use `docker exec -it <container_id> sh`, and then use the command `ls -l /container/path` to list the files and their owner user/group. this way you will be able to pinpoint exactly which user and group owns the files inside the container that might be creating issues. it will tell you very fast if the solution you tried is not working.

for more in-depth understanding, i recommend looking into books about unix operating systems like "operating system concepts" by silberschatz, galvin and gagne. it might seem like an overkill but it will help you understand the very core of the problem and also the basic principles of how the linux kernel handles file permissions. also, i found the manual pages for the `chown` and `chmod` command very useful as well.

ah! and one final tip, if you find that there are a lot of permission issues with docker images, well... that means you have a permission problem! (it is the best joke i can come up with). hope it helps, good luck!
